I am Patrice Lumumba, born in 1925 in Onalua
in Kasai province of the Belgian Congo.
I am the first prime minister of the Republic of
Congo after liberation from Belgian colonial rule.
Early in life, I developed interests in grassroots
union activities and joined the Postal Union. As
secretary-general of the union, I began publishing
essays critical of Belgian colonial rule and
advocating independence and a unified centralized
Congo. My writings appealed beyond ethnic and
regional loyalties to a national constituency.
In 1955, I became regional leader of the Circle of
Stanleyville and joined the Belgian Liberal Party.
To solidify my political base, in 1957 I helped
found a broad-based organization that appealed
beyond ethnic and regional loyalties—Movement
National Congolese that I represented at
the Pan-African Conference in Accra, Ghana.
My relentless attacks on Belgian rule soon
resulted in a leadership split in July 1959.
Undaunted, I insisted on the complete dismantling
of Belgian rule. As a result, I got exiled to
Brussels where I boldly condemned Belgian rule
and advocated immediate independence. Convinced
of the imminence of Congolese freedom, in 1960,
Belgium gave Congo its independence in 1960.
The Movement National Congolese won
the majority in the general election,
and I became prime minister of the Congo, with my
political rival Joseph Kasavubu as president. My
scathing denunciation of colonialism ruffled
feathers not only in Belgium but also in the
United States and Great Britain. Unfortunately,
my tenure was brief and marred in crises.
It began with the army revolt and secession in
Katanga and Southern Kasai that led to putting
me under house arrest. I made the fateful
attempt to escape to Stanleyville where my
supporters had gained control. I was apprehended
by secessionist rebels and assassinated in 1961.
I became a symbol of Congolese and African
freedom and being remembered today as one
of the African leaders truly dedicated to
national unity and genuine independence.
I prefer to die with my head raised
high, with unshakeable faith.
I pray our beloved Congo is blessed
with the world’s best living standards.